.\" -*-nroff-*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2021 Martin Lambers
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
.\" under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
.\" any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
.\" Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
.TH MPOPD 1 2021-09
.SH NAME
mpopd \- A minimal POP3 server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mpopd
[option...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Mpopd is a minimal POP3 server that delivers mails from a local mailbox in maildir
format. It can be used by end users as a way to handle incoming mail via mpop with
mail clients that insist on using POP3. See the EXAMPLES section below.
.br
Mpopd listens on 127.0.0.1 port 1100 by default, but can also run without its
own network sockets in inetd mode, where it handles a single POP3 session on
standard input / output.
.br
To prevent abuse, mpopd will allow only a limited number of concurrent POP3
sessions, and an authentication failure
occurrs, future authentication requests in any POP3 session will (for a limited
duration) only be answered after a small delay.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\-\-version"
Print version information
.IP "\-\-help"
Print help
.IP "\-\-inetd"
Start single POP3 session on stdin/stdout
.IP "\-\-interface=\fIip\fP
Listen on the given IPv6 or IPv4 address instead of 127.0.0.1
.IP "\-\-port=\fInumber\fP
Listen on the given port number instead of 25
.IP "\-\-log=\fInone\fP|\fIsyslog\fP|\fIfilename\fP
Set logging: none (default), syslog, or logging to the given file.
.IP "\-\-auth=\fIuser\fP[,\fIpasswordeval\fP]
Require authentication with this user name. The password will be
retrieved from the given \fIpasswordeval\fP command (this works 
just like passwordeval in mpop) or, if none is given,
from the key ring or, if that fails, from a prompt.
.IP "\-\-maildir=\fIdir\fP
Use this maildir as the mailbox.
.SH EXAMPLES
.br
.B Using mpopd to handle incoming mail for a POP3-based mail client
.br
Some mail clients cannot get incoming mail from local files and
instead insist on using a POP3 server. You can configure mpopd to be that
POP3 server and serve your incoming mail from a local maildir folder.
.br
(Similarly, some mail clients cannot send outgoing mail via a program such
as msmtp and instead insist on using an SMTP server.
You can configure msmtpd to be that SMTP
server and hand the mail over to msmtp. See the relevant section in the msmtp manual.)
.br
For this purpose, mpopd should listen on an unprivileged port, e.g. 1100 (the default).
A mailbox is defined using first the \fI--auth\fP option to set a user name and password
and then using the \fI--maildir\fP option to specify the maildir folder that holds the incoming mail.
Multiple such option pairs can be used to define multiple mailboxes, e.g. from different remote mail accounts.
Programs such as mpop can deliver new mail into the maildir folders at any time, but as long as mpopd is
running no other programs may alter or remove mails from these folders.
.br
Let's use the user name \fImpopd-user\fP. You have two options to manage the password:
.IP
Store the password in your key ring, e.g. with \fIsecret-tool store \-\-label=mpopd host localhost service pop3 user mpopd-user\fP.
In this case, use the mpopd option \fI\-\-auth=mpopd-user\fP.
.IP
Store the password in an encrypted file and use the passwordeval
mechanism. Example for gpg: \fImpopd ... \-\-auth=mpopd\-user,'gpg -q -d ~/.mpopd\-password.gpg'\fP
.PP
The complete command then is (using the keyring): \fImpopd \-\-auth=mpopd-user \-\-maildir=/path/to/your/maildir/folder\fP
.br
The mail client software must then be configured to use \fIlocalhost\fP at
port \fI1100\fP for incoming mail via POP3, and to use authentication with
user \fImpopd-user\fP and the password you chose. The mail client will
probably complain that the POP3 server does not support TLS, but in this
special case that is ok since all communication between your mail client and
mpopd will stay on the local machine.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mpop(1)
